docs/docker.md, before:

---
summary: "Optional Docker-based setup and onboarding for Clawdbot"
read_when:
  - You want a containerized gateway instead of local installs
  - You are validating the Docker flow
---

# Docker (optional)

Docker is **optional**. Use it only if you want a containerized gateway or to validate the Docker flow.

This guide covers:
- Containerized Gateway (full Clawdbot in Docker)
- Per-session Agent Sandbox (host gateway + Docker-isolated agent tools)

## Requirements

- Docker Desktop (or Docker Engine) + Docker Compose v2
- Enough disk for images + logs

## Containerized Gateway (Docker Compose)

### Quick start (recommended)

From repo root:

```bash
./docker-setup.sh
```

This script:
- builds the gateway image
- runs the onboarding wizard
- runs WhatsApp login
- starts the gateway via Docker Compose

It writes config/workspace on the host:
- `~/.clawdbot/`
- `~/clawd`

### Manual flow (compose)

```bash
docker build -t clawdbot:local -f Dockerfile .
docker compose run --rm clawdbot-cli onboard
docker compose run --rm clawdbot-cli login
docker compose up -d clawdbot-gateway
```

### Health check

```bash
docker compose exec clawdbot-gateway node dist/index.js health --token "$CLAWDBOT_GATEWAY_TOKEN"
```

### E2E smoke test (Docker)

```bash
scripts/e2e/onboard-docker.sh
```

### Notes

- Gateway bind defaults to `lan` for container use.
- The gateway container is the source of truth for sessions (`~/.clawdbot/sessions`).

## Per-session Agent Sandbox (host gateway + Docker tools)

### What it does

When `agent.sandbox` is enabled, **non-main sessions** run tools inside a Docker
container. The gateway stays on your host, but the tool execution is isolated:
- one container per session (hard wall)
- per-session workspace folder mounted at `/workspace`
- allow/deny tool policy (deny wins)

### Default behavior

- Image: `clawdbot-sandbox:bookworm-slim`
- One container per session
- Workspace per session under `~/.clawdbot/sandboxes`
- Auto-prune: idle > 24h OR age > 7d
- Network: `none` by default (explicitly opt-in if you need egress)
- Default allow: `bash`, `process`, `read`, `write`, `edit`
- Default deny: `browser`, `canvas`, `nodes`, `cron`, `discord`, `gateway`

### Enable sandboxing

```json5
{
  agent: {
    sandbox: {
      mode: "non-main", // off | non-main | all
      perSession: true,
      workspaceRoot: "~/.clawdbot/sandboxes",
      docker: {
        image: "clawdbot-sandbox:bookworm-slim",
        workdir: "/workspace",
        readOnlyRoot: true,
        tmpfs: ["/tmp", "/var/tmp", "/run"],
        network: "none",
        user: "1000:1000",
        capDrop: ["ALL"],
        env: { LANG: "C.UTF-8" },
        setupCommand: "apt-get update && apt-get install -y git curl jq",
        pidsLimit: 256,
        memory: "1g",
        memorySwap: "2g",
        cpus: 1,
        ulimits: {
          nofile: { soft: 1024, hard: 2048 },
          nproc: 256
        },
        seccompProfile: "/path/to/seccomp.json",
        apparmorProfile: "clawdbot-sandbox",
        dns: ["1.1.1.1", "8.8.8.8"],
        extraHosts: ["internal.service:10.0.0.5"]
      },
      tools: {
        allow: ["bash", "process", "read", "write", "edit"],
        deny: ["browser", "canvas", "nodes", "cron", "discord", "gateway"]
      },
      prune: {
        idleHours: 24, // 0 disables idle pruning
        maxAgeDays: 7  // 0 disables max-age pruning
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Hardening knobs live under `agent.sandbox.docker`:
`network`, `user`, `pidsLimit`, `memory`, `memorySwap`, `cpus`, `ulimits`,
`seccompProfile`, `apparmorProfile`, `dns`, `extraHosts`.

### Build the default sandbox image

```bash
scripts/sandbox-setup.sh
```

This builds `clawdbot-sandbox:bookworm-slim` using `Dockerfile.sandbox`.

### Sandbox common image (optional)
If you want a sandbox image with common build tooling (Node, Go, Rust, etc.), build the common image:

```bash
scripts/sandbox-common-setup.sh
```

This builds `clawdbot-sandbox-common:bookworm-slim`. To use it:

```json5
{
  agent: { sandbox: { docker: { image: "clawdbot-sandbox-common:bookworm-slim" } } }
}
```

### Sandbox browser image

To run the browser tool inside the sandbox, build the browser image:

```bash
scripts/sandbox-browser-setup.sh
```

This builds `clawdbot-sandbox-browser:bookworm-slim` using
`Dockerfile.sandbox-browser`. The container runs Chromium with CDP enabled and
an optional noVNC observer (headful via Xvfb).

Notes:
- Headful (Xvfb) reduces bot blocking vs headless.
- Headless can still be used by setting `agent.sandbox.browser.headless=true`.
- No full desktop environment (GNOME) is needed; Xvfb provides the display.

Use config:

```json5
{
  agent: {
    sandbox: {
      browser: { enabled: true }
    }
  }
}
```

Custom browser image:

```json5
{
  agent: {
    sandbox: { browser: { image: "my-clawdbot-browser" } }
  }
}
```

When enabled, the agent receives:
- a sandbox browser control URL (for the `browser` tool)
- a noVNC URL (if enabled and headless=false)

Remember: if you use an allowlist for tools, add `browser` (and remove it from
deny) or the tool remains blocked.
Prune rules (`agent.sandbox.prune`) apply to browser containers too.

### Custom sandbox image

Build your own image and point config to it:

```bash
docker build -t my-clawdbot-sbx -f Dockerfile.sandbox .
```

```json5
{
  agent: {
    sandbox: { docker: { image: "my-clawdbot-sbx" } }
  }
}
```

### Tool policy (allow/deny)

- `deny` wins over `allow`.
- If `allow` is empty: all tools (except deny) are available.
- If `allow` is non-empty: only tools in `allow` are available (minus deny).

### Pruning strategy

Two knobs:
- `prune.idleHours`: remove containers not used in X hours (0 = disable)
- `prune.maxAgeDays`: remove containers older than X days (0 = disable)

Example:
- Keep busy sessions but cap lifetime:
  `idleHours: 24`, `maxAgeDays: 7`
- Never prune:
  `idleHours: 0`, `maxAgeDays: 0`

### Security notes

- Hard wall only applies to **tools** (bash/read/write/edit).  
- Host-only tools like browser/camera/canvas are blocked by default.  
- Allowing `browser` in sandbox **breaks isolation** (browser runs on host).

## Troubleshooting

- Image missing: build with `scripts/sandbox-setup.sh` or set `agent.sandbox.docker.image`.
- Container not running: it will auto-create per session on demand.
- Permission errors in sandbox: set `docker.user` to a UID:GID that matches your
  mounted workspace ownership (or chown the workspace folder).

Commit message:

docs: document sandbox media staging

docs/docker.md, after:

---
summary: "Optional Docker-based setup and onboarding for Clawdbot"
read_when:
  - You want a containerized gateway instead of local installs
  - You are validating the Docker flow
---

# Docker (optional)

Docker is **optional**. Use it only if you want a containerized gateway or to validate the Docker flow.

This guide covers:
- Containerized Gateway (full Clawdbot in Docker)
- Per-session Agent Sandbox (host gateway + Docker-isolated agent tools)

## Requirements

- Docker Desktop (or Docker Engine) + Docker Compose v2
- Enough disk for images + logs

## Containerized Gateway (Docker Compose)

### Quick start (recommended)

From repo root:

```bash
./docker-setup.sh
```

This script:
- builds the gateway image
- runs the onboarding wizard
- runs WhatsApp login
- starts the gateway via Docker Compose

It writes config/workspace on the host:
- `~/.clawdbot/`
- `~/clawd`

### Manual flow (compose)

```bash
docker build -t clawdbot:local -f Dockerfile .
docker compose run --rm clawdbot-cli onboard
docker compose run --rm clawdbot-cli login
docker compose up -d clawdbot-gateway
```

### Health check

```bash
docker compose exec clawdbot-gateway node dist/index.js health --token "$CLAWDBOT_GATEWAY_TOKEN"
```

### E2E smoke test (Docker)

```bash
scripts/e2e/onboard-docker.sh
```

### Notes

- Gateway bind defaults to `lan` for container use.
- The gateway container is the source of truth for sessions (`~/.clawdbot/sessions`).

## Per-session Agent Sandbox (host gateway + Docker tools)

### What it does

When `agent.sandbox` is enabled, **non-main sessions** run tools inside a Docker
container. The gateway stays on your host, but the tool execution is isolated:
- one container per session (hard wall)
- per-session workspace folder mounted at `/workspace`
- allow/deny tool policy (deny wins)
- inbound media is copied into the sandbox workspace (`media/inbound/*`) so tools can read it

### Default behavior

- Image: `clawdbot-sandbox:bookworm-slim`
- One container per session
- Workspace per session under `~/.clawdbot/sandboxes`
- Auto-prune: idle > 24h OR age > 7d
- Network: `none` by default (explicitly opt-in if you need egress)
- Default allow: `bash`, `process`, `read`, `write`, `edit`
- Default deny: `browser`, `canvas`, `nodes`, `cron`, `discord`, `gateway`

### Enable sandboxing

```json5
{
  agent: {
    sandbox: {
      mode: "non-main", // off | non-main | all
      perSession: true,
      workspaceRoot: "~/.clawdbot/sandboxes",
      docker: {
        image: "clawdbot-sandbox:bookworm-slim",
        workdir: "/workspace",
        readOnlyRoot: true,
        tmpfs: ["/tmp", "/var/tmp", "/run"],
        network: "none",
        user: "1000:1000",
        capDrop: ["ALL"],
        env: { LANG: "C.UTF-8" },
        setupCommand: "apt-get update && apt-get install -y git curl jq",
        pidsLimit: 256,
        memory: "1g",
        memorySwap: "2g",
        cpus: 1,
        ulimits: {
          nofile: { soft: 1024, hard: 2048 },
          nproc: 256
        },
        seccompProfile: "/path/to/seccomp.json",
        apparmorProfile: "clawdbot-sandbox",
        dns: ["1.1.1.1", "8.8.8.8"],
        extraHosts: ["internal.service:10.0.0.5"]
      },
      tools: {
        allow: ["bash", "process", "read", "write", "edit"],
        deny: ["browser", "canvas", "nodes", "cron", "discord", "gateway"]
      },
      prune: {
        idleHours: 24, // 0 disables idle pruning
        maxAgeDays: 7  // 0 disables max-age pruning
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Hardening knobs live under `agent.sandbox.docker`:
`network`, `user`, `pidsLimit`, `memory`, `memorySwap`, `cpus`, `ulimits`,
`seccompProfile`, `apparmorProfile`, `dns`, `extraHosts`.

### Build the default sandbox image

```bash
scripts/sandbox-setup.sh
```

This builds `clawdbot-sandbox:bookworm-slim` using `Dockerfile.sandbox`.

### Sandbox common image (optional)
If you want a sandbox image with common build tooling (Node, Go, Rust, etc.), build the common image:

```bash
scripts/sandbox-common-setup.sh
```

This builds `clawdbot-sandbox-common:bookworm-slim`. To use it:

```json5
{
  agent: { sandbox: { docker: { image: "clawdbot-sandbox-common:bookworm-slim" } } }
}
```

### Sandbox browser image

To run the browser tool inside the sandbox, build the browser image:

```bash
scripts/sandbox-browser-setup.sh
```

This builds `clawdbot-sandbox-browser:bookworm-slim` using
`Dockerfile.sandbox-browser`. The container runs Chromium with CDP enabled and
an optional noVNC observer (headful via Xvfb).

Notes:
- Headful (Xvfb) reduces bot blocking vs headless.
- Headless can still be used by setting `agent.sandbox.browser.headless=true`.
- No full desktop environment (GNOME) is needed; Xvfb provides the display.

Use config:

```json5
{
  agent: {
    sandbox: {
      browser: { enabled: true }
    }
  }
}
```

Custom browser image:

```json5
{
  agent: {
    sandbox: { browser: { image: "my-clawdbot-browser" } }
  }
}
```

When enabled, the agent receives:
- a sandbox browser control URL (for the `browser` tool)
- a noVNC URL (if enabled and headless=false)

Remember: if you use an allowlist for tools, add `browser` (and remove it from
deny) or the tool remains blocked.
Prune rules (`agent.sandbox.prune`) apply to browser containers too.

### Custom sandbox image

Build your own image and point config to it:

```bash
docker build -t my-clawdbot-sbx -f Dockerfile.sandbox .
```

```json5
{
  agent: {
    sandbox: { docker: { image: "my-clawdbot-sbx" } }
  }
}
```

### Tool policy (allow/deny)

- `deny` wins over `allow`.
- If `allow` is empty: all tools (except deny) are available.
- If `allow` is non-empty: only tools in `allow` are available (minus deny).

### Pruning strategy

Two knobs:
- `prune.idleHours`: remove containers not used in X hours (0 = disable)
- `prune.maxAgeDays`: remove containers older than X days (0 = disable)

Example:
- Keep busy sessions but cap lifetime:
  `idleHours: 24`, `maxAgeDays: 7`
- Never prune:
  `idleHours: 0`, `maxAgeDays: 0`

### Security notes

- Hard wall only applies to **tools** (bash/read/write/edit).  
- Host-only tools like browser/camera/canvas are blocked by default.  
- Allowing `browser` in sandbox **breaks isolation** (browser runs on host).

## Troubleshooting

- Image missing: build with `scripts/sandbox-setup.sh` or set `agent.sandbox.docker.image`.
- Container not running: it will auto-create per session on demand.
- Permission errors in sandbox: set `docker.user` to a UID:GID that matches your
  mounted workspace ownership (or chown the workspace folder).
