docs/images.md, before:

---
summary: "Image and media handling rules for send, gateway, and agent replies"
read_when:
  - Modifying media pipeline or attachments
---
# Image & Media Support — 2025-12-05

CLAWDBOT is now **web-only** (Baileys). This document captures the current media handling rules for send, gateway, and agent replies.

## Goals
- Send media with optional captions via `clawdbot send --media`.
- Allow auto-replies from the web inbox to include media alongside text.
- Keep per-type limits sane and predictable.

## CLI Surface
- `clawdbot send --media <path-or-url> [--message <caption>]`
  - `--media` optional; caption can be empty for media-only sends.
  - `--dry-run` prints the resolved payload; `--json` emits `{ provider, to, messageId, mediaUrl, caption }`.

## Web Provider Behavior
- Input: local file path **or** HTTP(S) URL.
- Flow: load into a Buffer, detect media kind, and build the correct payload:
  - **Images:** resize & recompress to JPEG (max side 2048px) targeting `agent.mediaMaxMb` (default 5 MB), capped at 6 MB.
  - **Audio/Voice/Video:** pass-through up to 16 MB; audio is sent as a voice note (`ptt: true`).
  - **Documents:** anything else, up to 100 MB, with filename preserved when available.
- WhatsApp GIF-style playback: send an MP4 with `gifPlayback: true` (CLI: `--gif-playback`) so mobile clients loop inline.
- MIME detection prefers magic bytes, then headers, then file extension.
- Caption comes from `--message` or `reply.text`; empty caption is allowed.
- Logging: non-verbose shows `↩️`/`✅`; verbose includes size and source path/URL.

## Auto-Reply Pipeline
- `getReplyFromConfig` returns `{ text?, mediaUrl?, mediaUrls? }`.
- When media is present, the web sender resolves local paths or URLs using the same pipeline as `clawdbot send`.
- Multiple media entries are sent sequentially if provided.

## Inbound Media to Commands (Pi)
- When inbound web messages include media, CLAWDBOT downloads to a temp file and exposes templating variables:
  - `{{MediaUrl}}` pseudo-URL for the inbound media.
  - `{{MediaPath}}` local temp path written before running the command.
- Audio transcription (if configured) runs before templating and can replace `Body` with the transcript.

## Limits & Errors
- Images: ~6 MB cap after recompression.
- Audio/voice/video: 16 MB cap; documents: 100 MB cap.
- Oversize or unreadable media → clear error in logs and the reply is skipped.

## Notes for Tests
- Cover send + reply flows for image/audio/document cases.
- Validate recompression for images (size bound) and voice-note flag for audio.
- Ensure multi-media replies fan out as sequential sends.

Commit message:

docs: document sandbox media staging

docs/images.md, after:

---
summary: "Image and media handling rules for send, gateway, and agent replies"
read_when:
  - Modifying media pipeline or attachments
---
# Image & Media Support — 2025-12-05

CLAWDBOT is now **web-only** (Baileys). This document captures the current media handling rules for send, gateway, and agent replies.

## Goals
- Send media with optional captions via `clawdbot send --media`.
- Allow auto-replies from the web inbox to include media alongside text.
- Keep per-type limits sane and predictable.

## CLI Surface
- `clawdbot send --media <path-or-url> [--message <caption>]`
  - `--media` optional; caption can be empty for media-only sends.
  - `--dry-run` prints the resolved payload; `--json` emits `{ provider, to, messageId, mediaUrl, caption }`.

## Web Provider Behavior
- Input: local file path **or** HTTP(S) URL.
- Flow: load into a Buffer, detect media kind, and build the correct payload:
  - **Images:** resize & recompress to JPEG (max side 2048px) targeting `agent.mediaMaxMb` (default 5 MB), capped at 6 MB.
  - **Audio/Voice/Video:** pass-through up to 16 MB; audio is sent as a voice note (`ptt: true`).
  - **Documents:** anything else, up to 100 MB, with filename preserved when available.
- WhatsApp GIF-style playback: send an MP4 with `gifPlayback: true` (CLI: `--gif-playback`) so mobile clients loop inline.
- MIME detection prefers magic bytes, then headers, then file extension.
- Caption comes from `--message` or `reply.text`; empty caption is allowed.
- Logging: non-verbose shows `↩️`/`✅`; verbose includes size and source path/URL.

## Auto-Reply Pipeline
- `getReplyFromConfig` returns `{ text?, mediaUrl?, mediaUrls? }`.
- When media is present, the web sender resolves local paths or URLs using the same pipeline as `clawdbot send`.
- Multiple media entries are sent sequentially if provided.

## Inbound Media to Commands (Pi)
- When inbound web messages include media, CLAWDBOT downloads to a temp file and exposes templating variables:
  - `{{MediaUrl}}` pseudo-URL for the inbound media.
  - `{{MediaPath}}` local temp path written before running the command.
- When a per-session Docker sandbox is enabled, inbound media is copied into the sandbox workspace and `MediaPath`/`MediaUrl` are rewritten to a relative path like `media/inbound/<filename>`.
- Audio transcription (if configured) runs before templating and can replace `Body` with the transcript.

## Limits & Errors
- Images: ~6 MB cap after recompression.
- Audio/voice/video: 16 MB cap; documents: 100 MB cap.
- Oversize or unreadable media → clear error in logs and the reply is skipped.

## Notes for Tests
- Cover send + reply flows for image/audio/document cases.
- Validate recompression for images (size bound) and voice-note flag for audio.
- Ensure multi-media replies fan out as sequential sends.
